# #ActaDiurna - Covering the Flavian War



The Romans did not have newspapers in the modern sense of the term, at least not that we know about; however, a semi-official gazetteer existed in Rome, the Acta Diurna, originally established by Caesar und published regularly until the early 3rd century AD on tables mounted in the forum Romanum. Very little is known about what was actually reported; it is usually assumed that the acta included both official notifications as well as reports that we would nowadays probably call "society news", notifying the reader of recent deaths, impending marriages and other information from the life of the Roman upper classes; its tone is assumed to have been quite matter-of-factly, even if it may have included pictures accompanying the text; we probably have to think of The London Gazette rather than of than a tabloid.

The acta diurna certainly was one key source of information for those living in the eternal city, but by no means the only one; members of the city's aristocracy were well-connected and, we have to assume, in constant contact with their peers throughout the empire; quite possibly, therefore, news published in the acta may already have been known to them, and the acta may well have reported developments in regions far away from Italy only with a certain delay.

As a medium that was both to a certain extent slow and, to use a phrase that might anyone among Rome's upper classes concerned about the mos maiorum have deemed quite suitable, composed in tone and rhetoric, it was rather unlike some of the media available to us now; certainly, methodically sifting through the news of the day before putting together the tables for the following day in plain yet elegant Latin, "zealous", one might add, "in the pursuit of truth" while at the same time "reserved in emotion" (NGL Hammond, Sir John Edmwin Sandys 1844-1922, Cambride: CUP, 1933, 119), invokes the picture of a John Edwin Sandys rather than that of a William Thomas Stead.

But what if it was all slightly different? Imagine for a moment how the Romans might have used modern social media, for example - let's say with a young, energetic and easily to excite actuarius and something like Twitter. Certainly he would have tried to cover important events on at least a daily basis, and it was thinking about this that essentially lies behind the present project "#ActaDiurna - Covering the Flavian War".

In AD 69 the Roman empire was engulfed in civil war; by early summer, Galba, who had followed Nero on the throne, had been killed and replaced by Otho, who in turn had fought and lost against yet another usurper, Vitellius, who was accepted by the senate as the new emperor on April 19th; however, there was significant unrest in the army, and eventually on July 1st, elements of the army of Egypt proclaimed an old and experienced general emperor, initiating a second round of fighting for the purple which would be vastly more destructive than the first one. In the end, Vespasian defeated Vitellius soundly and on November 21st was finally declared the new emperor by the senate.

The history of the Year of the Four Emperors, as AD 69 is widely known, is every bit as fascinating as violent as its greatest chronicler, Tacitus, claimed it to be. It was a time full of sound and fury, its history, as Tacitus put it, a work opimum casibus, atrox proeliis, discors seditionibus, ipsa etiam pace saevum (rich in disasters, terrible with battles, torn by civil struggles, horrible even in peace). The purpose of "#ActaDiurna - Covering the Flavian War" is to provide daily updates on this war that shook the whole empire and to cover the period from the raising of Vespasian's banner in Alexandria in July to his acceptance by the senate at the end of November.

As far as the sources for the information given, much is invariably based on Tacitus, though a lot of it will obviously be conjectural, trying to capture both the mood at Rome and how armies, key individuals and information travelled throughout the empire. It also makes use of research into ways of travel inside the Roman empire, research which has led to the establishment of several project trying to estimate the time required for moving men and material. Again, much of that work is to a certain point conjectural, but it at least gives the observer a general idea about the complexity involved.

Why all this? It originated from a series of lectures on the Year of the Four Emperors I have held in the summer term of 2022 and my re-reading of Tacitus that went along with preparing for the individual lectures; the great commotion that was the year AD 69 is a fascinating story that merits looking at it from different angles, even from some that may be viewed as lacking a little bit in earnestness; of course - this really should go without saying - this is not meant as an academic contribution to the study of the Year of the Four Emperors, but essentially as a fun project; Yet, if this inspires only one person to take a look at Tacitus' account, then it is most definitely worth it - for, to end with a quite provocative statement, few things in Roman literature are as worthy of attention as Rome's greatest historiographer.
