And now it begins.

As the project "Covering the Flavian War" begins today, let us briefly look at the situation as it unfolded in the summer of AD 69. **Vitellius** had defeated **Otho** in the **First Battle of Bedriacum** several weeks earlier in mid-April, and Otho had killed himself afterwards to make an end to the civil war. His suicide was far from a necessity, though, as legions from the Danube provinces, who had declared for him, were about to reach Aquileia when the battle took place. This was less than 300km away from Bedriacum, a distance the legions could cover in ten days or less. Had they pressed on, the Flavian generala **Fabius Valens** and **Aulus Caecina Alienus** would have had to turn around their forces to meet the new threat, and while the Vitellian legions may have been buoyed by the recent success, they had also suffered significant losses already, whereas the Danube legions, themselves as battle-hardened as those from the Rhine, were still fresh, or as fresh as one could be after a forced march of a considerable distance. In other words, Otho's cause was far from lost; instead, a renewed round of fighting in Northern Italy held the prospect of destroying the combined forces of Fabius Valens and Aulus Caecina Alienus and significantly degrading the military capabilities of Vitellius. While the latter - in theory - would still have army units in Britain and Germany at his disposal, the destruction of his armies in Northern Italy might well have resulted in himself losing the loyalty of his remaining soldiers as they tried to jump a ship that was clearly sinking.

This is what **Gaius Suetonius Paulinus**, one of Otho's generals, will have laid out to the emperor on the evening after the battle. Suetonius Paulinus was a man of considerable military experience; he had successfully suppressed a Berber revolt in AD 41, twenty years later conquered the Isle of Man and in AD 61 defeated the Iceni queen Boudica in AD 61. He certainly had experience in finding a way out of situations that were, well, somewhat uncomfortable, finding himself vastly outnumbered when facing the army of the Iceni queen and having suffered a number of initial setbacks. Yet at the end of the day his army prevailed, and tens of thousands of British warriors lay dead on the battlefield. Of course, Vitellius' legions were in a different league compared to the ill-organized and, at least partly, worse-equipped rabble that made up the majority of Boudica's force. Yet there is very little doubt that on the evening of April 14, AD 69, Suetonius Paulinus did not consider the war to be over. Recover, regroup, wait for the Danube legions and carry on was his message to the emperor.

Otho however would have none of it. In a gesture the nobility of which was not lost on ancient historiography and managed to earn him praise even from Tacitus, he killed himself so as to spare the empire further bloodshed. News of his action will have spread fast, and soon the Danube legions were on their way back to their bases. Peace reigned, yet while Otho had ended the civil war between himself and Vitellius, it was the very fact that he took himself out of the game so quickly that eventually made it possible for war to return to Northern Italy, and in a fashion that clearly shocked contemporary observers. For the Danube legions were still very much against Vitellius, and as soon as a new and acceptable usurper would appear, they would throw in their lot with him.

That man was **Titus Flavius Vespasianus**. After an initial career that was for much of the time rather, well, undistinguished, for want of a less candid (and more precise...) term, he had successfully led legio II Augusta during the initial conquest of Britain in AD 43, securing much of the Southern coast, capturing the Ilse of Wight and eventually establishing a legionary fortress at Isca Dumnoniorum (Exeter). Vespasian gained the consulate in AD 51, but falling out of favour at court afterwards retired into private life. He was called back twelve years later and became the governor of the province of Africa where, instead of following the usual practice of extorting as much money from the provincials as possible, he seems to have started to fight corruption, though with limited success - and not everybody seems to have been happy about his exploits. Tacitus finds few positive words for his rule there, which may reflect the perspective of the Roman upper class more than that of the provincials themselves, while according to Suetonius the latter on one occasion pelted him with turnips. After his return from Africa he seems to have fallen out of favour with Nero for some time, but was called back in AD 66 to put down the revolt in Iudaea and defeat Jewish forces who had inflicted a number of embarrassing defeats onto the Romans, including the **Battle of Beth Horon**, where 6,000 legionaries perished and *legio XII fulminata* lost its eagle. By the summer of 69, now more than two years in theatre, Vespasian had subdued all of Galilee, started operations in Iudaea, and while there was still heavy fighting to come, few will have had doubts about the overall outcome of the war. In the summer of AD 69, then, Vespasian was a successful general commanding three legions with several years of fighting under their belt. If there was someone around whom grumbled soldiers with a strong disliking for Vitellius might rally, it was Vespasian. Assuming, of course, he decided to throw his hat into the ring.

Which he did on July 1, AD 69. 
